What-If analysis is very
important in analytics.
It is particularly relevant for
models that do not capture
all sources of uncertainty.
In our transportation problem for example,
we had considered that we know the demand
with certainty, or the demand is not going
to deviate much from the estimated values.
In reality, demand could be deviate
from average historical values.
In fact, even constant capacity
values may also be uncertain.
If the model does not consider
uncertainty, then what-if analysis can be
used to observe the effect of
changes in these input values.
One simple way of doing what-if
analysis is to change a value, and
then resolve the problem to
observe changes in the solution.
For example, let's suppose that it is
possible to increase the supply capacity
by ten units in any of the five
suppliers in our transportation example.
Where would we put these extra ten units?
Well, it seems reasonable to put them
in a place that will result in lowering
the total transportation cost the most.
If we don't have any other information,
we could just add ten units to
the capacity of all suppliers.
Resolve the problem, and
observe the change in the shipments and
the total cost.
This is fairly simple to do in
a small problem like ours, but
there is an easier way that
is scalable to large models.
Let's take a look at it.
Locate and open the Excel file titled
Transportation Problem-Optimization.
This file has the optimization model
that we built in the last video.
If you click on the ASP tab,
the silver options panel is displayed.
We can verify that the model is there.
Click on the play button
to rerun the software.
Now click on the reports tool in
the analysis group or the ASP tab, and
choose sensitivity within
the optimizations report.
A sensitivity report one tab
is added to the workbook.
This is the same as
the sensitivity report tab
that I already included in the workbook,
but
in which I have changed the names of
the cells to identify them better.
So let's use a sensitivity
report that I created.
The first table includes information
about the decision variables.
The second table includes
information about the constraints.
Scroll down to the information
about the capacity constraints.
The final value corresponds to the total
that is shipped from each supplier.
For example, cell G16 has a value of 60,
indicating that in the optimal solution,
60 units are shipped from
supplier A to O customers.
The table also shows the right
hand side of the constraints.
The right hand sides for
the capacity constraints indicate the
supply limits and the right hand sides for
the demand constraints indicate
the quantities required by each customer.
The shadow prices are the key
information in this table.
A shadow price is the change
in the objective function for
a unit of increase in the right
hand side of the constraints.
Since we're minimizing costs,
a negative shadow price means savings.
Therefore, the shadow price of -4 for
supplier A, means that if we increase
the capacity of this supplier by one unit,
the total cost will decrease by $4.
We can see that we don't save
any money by increasing
the capacity of suppliers B and C.
This makes sense,
because in the optimal solution,
these suppliers have extra capacity.
The savings for increasing the capacity
of suppliers D and E are $2.
Now the question is, can we keep saving
money if we keep increasing capacity?
In other words,
are these saving unlimited?
The answer is no.
The last two columns of the table
tells us the operational
range of these shadow prices.
For example, for supplier A,
we can increase capacity by 20 units and
save $4 per unit.
After 20 units,
we simply don't know what will happen,
the report is not able to
give us this information.
If we increase the capacity of
supplier A by more than 20 units,
we need to resolve the problem
to see what happens.
If we decrease capacity,
the cost will increase at the rate
given by the shadow price.
That is, if we reduce capacity by one
unit, then the cost will increase by $4.
This is true for
reductions of up to 15 units.
So to answer our original question
using the sensitivity report,
we examine all the shadow prices for
the suppliers, and
we find the one with
the most negative value.
This is Supplier A,
which has a shadow price of -4.
This is where we should add
the ten units of capacity,
and reduce the total cost from 890 to 850.
Let's make the change and
resolve the model to verify
that our interpretation of
the sensitivity report is correct.
Go to cell G6 in the model, and
change the value from 60 to 70.
Click on the play button.
As predicted by the sensitivity report,
the cost went down by $40 to 850.
The one thing that you must keep in
mind about the sensitivity report,
is that the information that it gives you
is only valid for one change at a time.
That is, the shadow price of -4 for
supplier A is only valid if all the other
data in the model remains unchanged.
Let's restore the capacity for
Supplier A to 60, and go back to
the sensitivity report to interpret the
shadow prices for the main constraints.
Know that all the shadow prices for
the demand constraints are positive.
These values are the cost of sending
additional units to these customers if all
other data remains unchanged, that is, if
the capacities and the cost don't change.
For example, if customer four
wants one more unit of product,
the transportation costs for
that unit will be $8.
This is very valuable information
because without resolving the problem,
we can tell the increase in the costs
to the additional units of demand.
Here again, these values are only true
within the ranges specified in the table.
For customer four, this means that
the shadow price is valued for
an increase of up to 15 more units or
for a decrease of 20 units.
Let's change the demand
in F11 from 65 to 75, and
verify that the cost will increase by $80,
to $907.
As predicted, the cost did change to $970,
change the demand back to 65.
Now let's take a look at one more
thing in the sensitivity report.
There is a reduced cost for
each decision variable.
This value is the amount by which
the original cost needs to be reduced in
order for the solution to include
a shipment in that particular cell.
For the cells that are already shipping
products, the reduced cost is zero.
This makes sense,
the cost doesn't need to be reduced
since the cell is already being used.
Let's take C4 as an example.
The current cost is $9, and
the reduced cost is $1.
So, the reduced cost is saying
that we need to reduce the cost
of $9 by more than $1 for C4 to be used.
Remember that C4 represents shipments
from supplier C to customer four.
Let's try this change.
If we go from nine to eight,
nothing is going to change.
The reduction needs to be of
more than the reduced cost.
So we can enter 7.9 in cell F8 and
resolve.
The new solution includes
a shipment of 20 units from C to 4.
The allowable increase and
decrease values for the decision variables
give us an indication of how precise
the cost estimates need to be.
If a cost has a very wide range,
then we know that we don't
need a very precise estimate.
Because modest changes in this value
will not change the ultimate solution.
The sensitivity report provides very
useful information for pricing decisions.
The value of resources and
the robustness of the optimal solution.
For complex what if questions involving
multiple changes in the model,
there might not be any other option
than making the changes in the model and
resolving the model.
However, for
direct questions about single items,
such as the demand of a customer,
or the capacity of a supplier,
the sensitivity report is all you
need to answer what if questions.